#AdHocDroid: mobile connectivity without infrastructure

Researchers in Portugal have developed an IP-based mesh network that uses rooted Android phones
to allow connectivity even where there is no provider-based signal.

Mobile AdHoc NETworks (MANETs) that attempt to create device-based webs from which information
can hop through participating users.

But the new solution, dubbed AdHocDroid, uncommonly amongst similar efforts, supports standard
TCP/IP applications and generates a genuine IEEE 802.11 MANET, initially using Android-based 
smartphones which have been rooted.

Similar applications which have exploited WiFi Direct or a commingling of IEEE 802.1 and Bluetooth 
(such as the Serval Project) need overlay routing and dedicated applications which are able to take
advantage of the resulting proprietary protocols.

AdHocDroid first systematically disables network connectivity using the Android API, in order to 
stop individual applications attempting to re-enable or reconfigure network settings on the phone.
The application then rewrites the text file which stores all known network configuration in order
to make the MANET the default connectivity path.

The researchers claim that AdHocDroid is the only MANET to date which satisfies the full definition
of the term:
	# WiFi Direct cannot perform multi-hop, in addition to requiring a dedicated framework.
	# Open Garden shares this latter flaw, in addition to requiring a wireless network at one point in the mesh
	# Serval Project needs dedicated systems.

Measuring throughput on AdHocDroid, the team found contention to be comparable to a standard network
connection using multi-hop, but doubly speedy on single hop, due to the absence of an intermediate
node.

Power consumption was broadly equivalent to standard network usage, except in certain configurations
of the mesh protocol.

#NOTES & TEST
The researchers used the Gigabyte Gsmart G1305 running Android 2.3 with CyanogenMod 7, and the 
Samsung Nexus S running Android 4.3 and CyanogenMod 10.2.1. Additionally they enabled AdHocDroid 
on the Samsung Galaxy Tab 10.1 tablet running Android 3.2.

To test their system the researchers undertook a series of experiments using standard multiplayer 
game apps from the Android Store, using the Nexus S for these. The game 2048 Battle worked well out
of the box on the new network, but Spaceteam initially failed to get multi-hop working, since the 
game by default uses multicast DNS to locate the opponent – traffic which is not forwarded by the 
router. However after discovery the game worked well, and could even switch comfortably between 
single-hop and multi-hop.
