The range of Wi-Fi poses a technical challenge for mesh networks. Tests by the Serval project 
indicate that for two phones to communicate directly over a Wi-Fi mesh, they need to be within 
100 meters of one another with a clear line of sight, or about a room away if they’re linking 
through buildings.

Serval is currently testing a device called a mesh extender that can help networks based on its 
technology reach farther. The device uses Wi-Fi to connect tens of nearby Serval devices to a 
long-range radio link. If extenders are mounted on the roof, links between several of them 
should be able to stretch kilometers, says Gardner-Stephen. A crowdfunding campaign to support 
development of a production version of his prototype will launch soon, and the New Zealand Red 
Cross is helping test the current design.

Most efforts to develop mesh networking are focused on Google’s Android operating system because 
Apple’s mobile devices are difficult to modify and relatively expensive. Android powers the 
majority of smartphones worldwide, dominating in the places where poor infrastructure makes mesh 
networking especially valuable.

However, some mesh proponents say Google is unnecessarily hampering their efforts because it does 
not support the device-to-device mode of Wi-Fi chips in its Android software (a complaint registered 
with Google as “Android bug #82”). That means before a device can become an active part of a mesh 
network, a user must bypass Android’s security controls, or “root” the device, by installing 
special software. Unrooted devices can use connectivity provided by a mesh network, but they can’t 
help expand its coverage.

Both the Commotion and Serval projects have tried to get Google to change the policy, to no avail. 
Gardner-Stephen says Google may believe that smartphone manufacturers and wireless carriers want 
it to resist. He adds that the company should consider the contribution it could make to disaster 
response by allowing—if not explicitly promoting—the creation of mesh networks. “Their policy is 
inhibiting this kind of humanitarian telecommunication,” he says.
